# Chapter 8: Supply and Demand

In this chapter, we analyze the interactions between the prices of undifferentiated goods, in the presence of competition:

- Consider a model of the price of used textbooks. A collection of 1st year students each individually has a maximum price they are willing to pay for a textbook. 2nd year students who previously took the course can sell their used textbooks, each in a roughly identical condition. Each of these 2nd students have a *reservation price*, the minimum price they are willing to sell their textbook at, which varies depending on the value they place on keeping the textbook. The demand of 1st year students decreases as the price increases as the price passes beyond individual’s maximum buying price. Alternately, the supply increases as the price increases, as more 2nd year students are willing to sell their old books.
- Students may rely on word of mouth to find options for exchange. But since both parties are likely to want to know other options, they are likely to congregate to a common marketplace for a product, e.g. on Facebook or Ebay. A similar situation occured in a more old fashioned context, i.e. when farmers congregated in a *grain exchange*, a building in town where many farmers met with many merchants to sell their grain. This was the story introduced by the late 19th century economist Alfred Marshall to introduce the concept of *supply and demand* under a model of *perfect competition,* which he justified under the following assumptions:
    - Many undifferentiated producers competing to sell goods, and many consumers competing to buy a good.
    - Sellers act independently from one another.
    - Buyers know the prices of each seller’s good without having to apply any effort.
    
    Perfectly competitive markets *rarely occur,* because otherwise there would be very little for economics to actually study. Most importantly, perfectly competitive markets are studied because they *heavily control* the behaviour of individuals, so that in real life, when we notice that individual actors are not behaving according to these principles, we can try and investigate how perfect competition fails.
    
    Marshall argued that in a perfectly competitive market, “although the price ‘may be tossed hither and thither like a shuttlecock’ in the ‘higgling and bargaining’ of the market, it would never be very far from the particular price at which the quantity demanded by merchants was equal to the quantity the farmers would supply.”
    
- The *equilibrium,* or *market clearing price* is the price where supply equals demand. If a price was above the equilibrium, there would be an excess supply of textbooks. If the price was below equilibrium, there would be excess demand. In either situation, someone would benefit from changing the price they would be willing to buy or sell a product. Thus the price would tend to settle down to equilibrium over time, forcing everyone to sell goods at this price (the *law of one price*).
- At the equilibrium, both producers and consumers become *price takers:* they are unable to change the price of their product without losing income as a result. The price is dictated to them. On the other hand, producers of differentiated products are *price setters*, whereas the consumers are price takers.
    - Let us model this more precisely. In this model of perfect competition, the price P of individual goods is fixed since supply equals demand. The only choice you have is the amount of goods you produce, i.e. the quantity Q of goods you produce. Let C denote the cost of producing this supply of goods. Then one chooses Q so as to maximize PQ - C. Taking derivatives here gives that P = dC/dQ, i.e. we choose Q so that the marginal cost of production equals the price.
    - We can therefore pretend the market acts as a single producer, with a marginal cost function *equals* to the price that is sold, since this will be the average marginal cost of everyone producing goods? Question: Is this true?
    - Individuals who buy or sell goods obtain a surplus with respect to the difference between the prices they were willing to sell at. Market equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market has the property that the *total surplus* is maximized, i.e. the sum of surpluses from every individual in the market. In particular, the equilibrium is also *Pareto efficient*.
    
    Let us dwell on the properties here that give us Pareto efficiency.
        - All participants in the market are *price takers*. They have no market power to influence the prices in the market because all individuals know that they can find other competitors to trade with in the market. Differentiated products can result in Pareto inefficient allocations.
        - Exchanges are *complete contracts*, where everything can be controlled in the exchange. This does not occur, as we saw, in the distribution of wages.
        - The exchange does not effect anyone outside of the market.
        
        The Pareto efficiency is often used as an argument in favour of markets, but we should be careful with the assumptions above since failing to satisfy these properties may result in a Pareto inefficient allocation. And Pareto efficiency does not take into account *fairness* at all. Despite maximizing total surplus, market equilibrium gives no guarantees on how surplus is distributed. In general, the distribution will depend on the relative elasticity of the product being sold. 
        
- In a perfectly competitive market, prices can *only change* if the supply or demand of a product changes, i.e. if people enter / leave the market, change their reserve prices, or innovation changes the production of a particular good. This is called a *shock* in economics.
- In a perfectly competitive market, taxes will result in a deadweight loss in the total amount of surplus generated. As we saw in the last chapter, to guarantee the most profit for themselves, governments are motivated tax inelastic goods. This is because the demand will not be changed by the resulting increase in the price of goods. Thus the consumers feel the cost of a tax increase as well as the suppliers, because the suppliers are forced to increase prices in order to maximize their own profits. The fact that individuals are unable to escape from these price raises due to the in-elasticity of the goods often leads to resistance from consumers (Gandhi’s Salt March due to tax increase on salt, The French Revolution being partly caused by an increase in the price of salt).
- In a perfectly competitive market of undifferentiated products, advertising does not actually help sell your product, since the benefits of advertising will go to all sellers of the product you sell (e.g. “Buy Milk”). The same is true for lobbying. Innovation is discouraged, because other individuals can take advantage of that innovation, unless you have some way of securing that innovation solely for yourself (thus obtaining a schumpeterian rent).