# Chapter 6: The Firm, Owners, Managers, and Employees

Apple, Samsung, and Toshiba are examples of *Firms*. A firm is a method of organizing production where private owners of capital goods hire labor to produce goods and services to make a profit.

The biggest change in the last 20 years has been the formation of the global economy. The supply of workers has vastly increased because many countries (China, The former soviet union). The result is *outsourcing,* where western companies hire other firms which provide labor in other countries, often at a much lower wage than in the west, and with lower safety standards.

We have already seen examples of how firms operate in previous chapters:

- In Chapter 2, we analyzed how innovation effects the production of resources.
- In Chapter 3, we studied the tradeoffs individuals make when offering up their time as wage labor to firms.
- In Chapter 4 and 5, we studied situations where market exchange is not so predominant, where individuals must work together to produce things that are beneficial to everyone, and must act to discourage free riding.
- In Chapter 6, we studied how bargaining power effects the distribution of surplus in a firm.
- In this chapter, we study the distribution of wages is determined in a firm, i.e. how a firm acquires the necessary labor to produce goods and services. Our analysis takes into account the theories of *Herbert Simon*, who argued the importance of seeing a firm as a collection of individuals, with conflicting interests, rather than an individual entity acting to maximize profit. While contracts offer precisely defined terms by which that can be specified in a contract, in wage labor there is often much uncertainty about the terms needed to be followed in a situation (e.g. employers do not necessarily know what employees need to do in advance of hiring them). He was lead to the conclusion that the price mechanism that determines free market action needed to be supplemented / or supplanted by institutions that were better equipped to handle uncertainty. Psychological analysis must be taken into account, because it does not seem that tying individual rewards into the success of an organization leads to have a large effect on the success of an organization, which contradicts the orthodox microeconomic approach.

The normal organization of a firm is that the board of directors of a company decide on long term objectives, which they provide as objectives for their managers to conduct. Manager’s then make a process of how these objectives can be carried out, and direct employees to carry out task that go towards these objectives. Thus there is a *separation of ownership and control.*

- An important thing here is *information asymmetry*. Workers know things that managers do not, and managers know things that the board of directors do not, and it is difficult to decide whether an employee is doing their job to the terms of a contract (Imagine how difficult it would be to determine in court whether it was reasonable for a manager to fire an employee who was not smiling enough). Thus contracts of employment are *incomplete* (this is not unusual, e.g. tenancy agreements often have the goal of having tenants maintain the value of a property, which cannot be completely enforced, insurance contracts stipulate that the insured not take excessive risks, which cannot be guaranteed, and so on).
- The profit from a firm does not directly benefit the employees / managers working at a firm, it goes to the shareholders of a company. Thus there are conflicts of interest in a company.
    - Owners can moderate this conflict of interest by having the authority to remove poorly performing managers. The board of directors can dismiss managers. And the board of directors can be dismissed by stockholders, though this rarely happens at large companies, since it usually requires a consolidated effort that cannot easily decide on things, and there is a free riding problem, stock holders must rely on other stock holders to monitor the board, and this leads to less monitoring.
- The relation of a firm is different to the relation of the market however: selling wage labor gives some people power over other the use of another person’s time: once individuals are employed, a firm operates as a centrally planned economic structure.
- Employment at a firm leads to the development of *relationship specific assets* for the firm, individuals acquire relationships with other individuals employed at the firm which make them valuable to the firm itself, and are difficult to replace when hiring another individual. This gives power to an individual working at a firm as these relationship specific assets are developed, and an individual can, most of the time, leave a firm at any time.
- The main arguments as to model a firm as *profit maximizing* is that stock holders have a strong interest in directing a company to maximize profit, and the market heavily penalizes, if not eliminates, companies that are not able to maximize profit.

Our main conclusion to our analysis is that, because contracts do not specify the precise terms of an employees job, it is in the interest of a firm to avoid paying the lowest possible wage.

- A firm often *cannot* pay employees directly in terms of their productive capability, i.e. on a *piece rate*, because it is very difficult to measure the productive capacity of an individual, both because it is difficult to measure the output of an employee in a modern firm, and because most productive output is a result of a team effort.
- Employees gain *employment rent* from working in a firm, not only in the amount of wages they get at a job vs. at other jobs, but also because of the other assets working at the firm has over other jobs (work friends, not having to drive as far to get to work, medical insurance, and social status).
    - Question: The book provides evidence that the employment rent in Pennsylvania in 1982 was $15,000 in income by measuring the effects of income when a company closes down / has mass layoffs. But does this really account for the greater number of unemployed / other economic factors which resulted in mass layoffs?
- Let us build a model to understand employment rent.
    - An individual evaluates two aspects of their job: the utility they get from a job, and the amount of effort they have to put into a job. Let us represent the hourly utility N = W - D as the difference between the hourly utility W gained from working at the job, minus the D *disutility* that comes from working hard per hour. This gives the employment rent per hour, compared to being unemployed.
    - Suppose that if that individual is fired, then it will take T hours of potential work time spent unemployed before that individual can find another, equivalent job. Then the total employment rent an individual receives in exchange for working, rather than being fired, is TN. If, on the other hand, let us suppose that instead of being completely unemployed, the individual has a *reservation wage R*, the lowest wage that the individual would be able to obtain while working at an intensity that gives no disutility (e.g. via family assistance / unemployment benefits), which they are able to obtain after being fired, before finding a new job. If an employee is fired, they therefore lose an economic rent of TN. This formula might have to be modified if the reservation wage does not last for a full time period of unemployment (e.g. if benefits run out before finding a new job), but we ignore this in this analysis.
    - We represent the interaction between an employee and a manager as a *principal agent hidden action problem.* A *principal agent problem* is a game in which a *principal* would like an *agent* to act in some way, without direct control over the agent, and typically not in line with an agents direct interests. A *hidden action problem* occurs when one of the parties in a game cannot observe all actions of another party. The employer chooses a wage, the employee chooses an intensity of work to fit that wage. For each level I of intensity that an employee works, there is a certain probability p that the employer will observe the employee working at a lower intensity, and will fire them as a result. Let us assume ceteris paribus there is no way for the employer to change the probability of catching employees slacking off.
        - Given a particular salary offer W, an employee chooses an intensity of work I which maximizes the expected amount of utility they expect to gain for choosing that intensity of work. With probability 1 - p, they are not caught slacking, and obtain an economic rent of NT units of economic utility. With probability p, they are caught slacking, and gain no economic rent at all since they are forced to take a reserve salary. Thus the employee is motivated to choose an intensity level I which maximizes (1 - p) NT = (1 - p)(W - D - R)T. The relation W → I given by this model is a concave function because TODO
        - As an example, if W = R, then (1 - p)(W - D - R)T is negative except when I = 0. Thus at minimum wage, we expect an employee to put no effort into their job.
        - For a given level of intensity I, the employer receives an amount of labor proportional to I. Thus the cost per unit amount of labor is proportional to W/I. The employer is therefore motivated to choose W to minimize W/I, and will thus choose a wage W which causes the marginal rate of transformation of wage into labor to be zero. The resulting quantity W is called the *efficiency wage*, since it takes into account the efficiency of an employee in terms of the wage an employee is receiving.
        - One consequence of this model is that *there must always be involuntary unemployment*. Let us suppose that the optimal wage offered by an employer resulted in little to no involuntary unemployment. Then people would almost always be able to find an equivalent job immediately after being fired, and thus there would be no penalty to being fire. Thus employers would receive no productivity from their workers if there was no involuntary unemployment, and thus we observe a contradiction, since no goods would be produced.
        - A similar consequence is that an increase in the unemployment rate likely increases the amount of time before an individual can find another job, thus increasing the amount of economic rent from keeping a job, and thus increasing the intensity an individual is likely to work at a given wage.
            - Edward Lazaer, economic advisor to US President George W. Bush, observed that the average productivity of firms rose from 2006 to 2010. One explanation is that average productivity rose because management fired the least productive members of a workforce. But Lazaer found that the result was more a result of individuals working harder. Economist Truman Bewley observed that only a handful of firms cut wages in the 1990s recession. This goes to observe that employers are scared to cut wages, fearing that it would hurt employee morale, ultimately costing the firm in productivity more than they would gain by saving wage costs.
            - Our model thus postulates the existence of a *wage curve*. If we assume the unemployment rate is correlated with the average amount of time for an individual to find another job, then the higher the unemployment rate is in an economy, the lower wages will be.
- Some businesses operate on a different economic model to that of the firm, the *worker owned cooperative*. Examples include John Lewis, the owner of Waitrose, founded in 1850 and owned by employees since 1950. Cooperatives are hierarchically organized, but managers owe their jobs to their employees. Fellow employees will not tolerate freeloaders, and so it remains in a managers best interest to ensure employees work hard. Reduced need for supervision is one reason why worker owned cooperatives are at least as productive, if not more, than conventional firms. Inequalities between wages in a worker owned cooperative are also typically much less than conventional firms. However, we will later see that starting worker cooperatives is hard, because banks are less willing to loan funds to individuals who are not wealthy.

*Observations:* The lack of math is beginning to cause some problems for the book.