# Chapter 3: Work, Scarcity, and Choice

- In this chapter, we study *tradeoffs* between two things desired by an individual, choosing between two things that are limited in terms for one another. For instance, a desire for money working for a job, vs. free time, or a high GPA, vs. free time.
- While Employee’s cannot usually tell Employers how many hours they want to work, over time the hours that we work do change. In part, this is due to how much we prefer to work.
- Countries with a larger GDP per capita tend to have lower working hours.
    - Full answer as to why is complex:
        - In some countries more people exist at a working age.
        - Political and cultural factors influence how easily available paid time off is.
- Paid work can take many forms:
    - In India, quite a lot of paid work is *own account work* (self employment) or *family work,* for instance, a woman working by herself or with her family making money as an embroiderer or by raising cattle.
    - Another common form of labor in India is *casual labor,* work paid for by a daily wage, but temporary. Laborers must find a new day of work every day. Agricultural workers, carpenters, painters, masons, and other construction workers are common examples.
    - The rarest employment in India is w*age labor*, or *regular labor*, which is the common form of work we think of when we think of paid work. But note that most of the world’s workforce does not operate using wage labor.
    - *Care work* is often an example of unpaid work, e.g. work taken out of a feeling of responsibility or affection for a group of people rather than for money. This work is often vital to the reproduction of human society. That woman are often culturally pressured into care work is often a major obstruction to women’s ability to work for pay, even if there is no cultural stigma that prevents a woman to work for pay.
- Work even within a low income country can differ greatly in the amount of money earned per hour, or the *productivity* of labor. It is very difficult (even for employers) to measure the amount of work activity that goes into the production of a good or service, and it is also very difficult to compare the effort to produce different goods or services (a car vs. a cake), so economists mostly measure labor by the number of hours worked.
- Most of the time, the marginal product of labor is diminishing, i.e. the production function is a concave function of the number of labor hours used in a given amount of time.
- The p*references* of an individual are a measure of how much an individual prefers a given choice over another given choice. Often this is measured quantitatively in terms of the *utility* of a given action. A given family of options that an individual is indifferent to (the individual prefers neither one option over the other) is called an *indifference curve*. If we measure a choice in terms of various quantities, and assume all quantities ceteris paribus except for two quantities X and Y, then an indifference curve will literally be a curve Y = f(X) provided that one can always substitute a given quantity X for a given quantity Y.
    - If the indifference curve Y = f(X) is sloped downward, then this indicates that X is a *tradeoff over Y*, i.e. you prefer having more of both X and of Y. In this case, an option which has more of both X and Y will necessarily be preferred over an option with less of X and Y.
    - An indifference curve is usually smooth, since small changes in X should not cause big jumps in utility.
    - At a given point on the curve Y = f(X), the magnitude of the slope of this curve is called the *marginal rate of substitution.* It is a ratio giving the amount of the quantity X one would give away indifferently in exchange for an amount of the quantity Y.
    - The curve is concave as a consequence of the *decreasing marginal rate of substitution.* If I have more of a given quantity, I am willing to give more of it away in exchange for another quantity.
    - An *opportunity cost* is a tradeoff between two options given some limitation. If you want to have more free time, you must work less, and therefore obtain less income. You obtain economic rent when you take an action that results in obtain more benefit than the amount of money you lose.
    - *The feasible frontier* is the feasible choices that one can make (e.g. one cannot work greater than 24 hours in a day, or have more than 24 hours of free time). Given that one wants more of each quantity, one should never rationally choose an option on the interior of the feasible frontier, since then one would be giving up having more of both quantities. If the boundary of the feasible frontier defines a smooth curve sloping downwards, then the magnitude of the slope of this curve at a point is called the *marginal rate of transformation*, it is the ratio between the amount of the quantity Y that an individual is constrained to give up if that individual wants to obtain more of the quantity X.
    - An individual will choose the most preferable option in the feasible frontier. Calculus tells us this will occur at a point where the marginal rate of transformation is equal to the marginal rate of substitution, and this point will be a unique optimum by convex geometry (e.g. the slopes of both functions are decreasing).
- Example application: If w is your wage in dollars per hour, t is the number of hours of free time, then your *budget constraint* is c = w(24 - t). The marginal rate of transformation in this case is precisely your wage: for each extra hour of free time you give away, you earn w extra dollars you can use to spend on other things. One then picks a point on the line feasible frontier 0 ≤ t ≤ 24, c = w(24 - t) on which the marginal rate of substitution with respect to a given individual preferences equals that marginal rate of transformation.
    - Imagine you are given an additional 50 dollars for free. Then the budget constraint would be c = 50 + w(24 - t), and this would change the feasible frontier, and thus change the action an individual takes. Similarily, we could imagine your wage increases by 5 dollars, so we instead consider the constraint region c = (w + 5)(24 - t).
        - In either case you will respond by having either more free time, or more consumption, or both. But assuming the decreasing marginal rate of substitution, you will never have less free time, or less consumption. The effect that an additional amount of income has given no change in any other quantities is called the *income effect*.
- In 1930, Keynes predicted that by 1930, technological improvement would make us, on average, 8 times better off, and we would only need to work 15 hours a week in order to satisfy our needs, but this did not turn out to be true. TODO: Read essays from Keynes / Tim Harford to determine why.
- Whether we do think through possible actions using this constraint optimization model does not affect whether this is a good model of economics. Lack of realism is an intentional feature of the model. Despite not doing the mathematical calculations, individuals tend to try different options and determine which they prefer on the others, and this means that individuals actions tends to converge to the mathematical calculation.
    
    > Consider the problem of predicting the shots made by an expert billiard player. It seems not at all unreasonable that excellent predictions would be yielded by the hypothesis that the billiard player made his shots as if he knew the complicated mathematical formulas that would give the optimum directions of travel, could estimate accurately by eye the angles, etc., describing the location of the balls, could make lightning calculations from the formulas, and could then make the balls travel in the direction indicated by the formulas.
    
    Our confidence in this hypothesis is not based on the belief that billiard players, even expert ones, can or do go through the process described. It derives rather from the belief that, unless in some way or other they were capable of reaching essentially the same result, they would not in fact be expert billiard players.
    
    - *Milton Friedman: Essays in Positive Economics*
    > 
    - A more reasonable objection to this model is that employers typically choose working hours, not individuals. Although individuals have little freedom to choose their working hours, workers in a democracy may ‘choose’ to vote for, and that government may limit the amount of hours an individual can feasibly work. Or they may bargain as individuals in a trade union to make a contract requiring employers to pay overtime hours, or limit hours. Furthermore, employers who advertise working hours may find that they have fewer applicants than other employers offering more preferable working hours.
        - Juliet Schor: Working hours reflect bargaining power: in times of unemployment / lower influence of unions / government, employers have more bargaining power, and they tend to want employees to work more. In a given industry, individuals do not have enough choice to determine the number of hours they work.
        
        In a given society, it is decided whether we use greater productivity to produce more stuff, or to have more leisure time. The conventional view suggests that individuals choose their working hours, but if the employers have greater control, then it makes sense that greater productivity is turned towards producing more stuff. Greater working hours tends to correlate with a higher carbon footprint.
    - Cultures also seem to differ. Northern European countries value free time, South Korean countries do not.