# Chapter 10: Banks, Money, and the Credit Market

- Money is a *medium of exchange*, i.e. *anything accepted as payment,* and is an item used purely for that purpose, i.e. it’s exchange value rather than it’s use value. Money requires *trust*, i.e. money only works provided that individuals believe that the exchange value of that currency is accepted by others in exchange for goods and services.
- *Wealth* is the total monetary value of things an individual owns. *Income* is the amount of money you recieve over time. Wealth is a *stock variable*, i.e. it is just a quantity of money, whereas Income is a *flow variable*, i.e. it is a quantity of money over time.
- Wealth, in the form of physical items like cars, tends to *depreciate* over time. *Gross income* is the increase of income not accounting for depreciation. *Net income* accounts for this depreciation. Individuals also have *consumption expenditures.* Provided that consumption expenditures are less than net income, an individuals wealth will increase, i.e. wealth increases at a rate equal to net income minus consumption expenditures.
- If you consumption is less than your net income, you *save* money, i.e. your wealth increases. In this unit we will try and analyze the economics of saving, lending, and borrowing.

*Borrowing and Lending*

- Let us suppose that we can borrow money at a particular annual *interest rate* r. Individuals thus have the ability to spend money in the present that they will earn in the future. But there is an opportunity cost to this choice: 1 dollar in the present costs you (1 + r) dollars that you earn a year from now. Thus 1 + r is the *marginal rate of transformation of future goods to present goods*.
- Let us assume that an individual will earn a fixed amount of money $M$ a year from now, and has no income until then. That individual to take out a loan on that future income, receiving $L$ dollars right now to spend, but then having to pay an interest rate of $1+r$ dollars, thus only really receiving $M - L(1+r)$ dollars in the future.
- An individual might prefer to spend money now because of *smoothing*, i.e. using a good over a long amount of time might be more preferable to using all of a good at once in a year. Or the individual might just be impatient.
    - Smoothing occurs because of the *decreasing marginal rates of consumption* or the *law of satiation of wants*, i.e. the marginal utility obtained by consuming something decreases as we consume more and more of that item.
    - Someone impatient might just value present utility higher in the present than that same imagined future utility.
    - We therefore have a family of indifference curves on the on the family of pairs $(C_1,C_2)$, where the first element gives the amount consumed at the present, and the second the amount consumer in a year. The *discount rate $\rho$* of an individuals consumption at a particular point is the slope of the indifference curve at that point, minus one. This means that an extra unit of consumption in the present is worth $1 + \rho$ units of consumption in a year. Calculus tells us that optimal utility will be obtained in the feasible choices of consumption at a point where $\rho = r$. When $\rho$ exceeds $r$, it becomes more preferable to consume in the present. When $\rho$ is less than $r$, it  is more preferable to consume in the future.
    - On the other hand, suppose an individual has income now, but no income in a year. They might therefore be motivated to *save* income so they might consume it later, smoothing out utility. But the individual might increase total utility by *lending* a portion of the income they have just earned. As the interest rate $r$ increases, the individual will be willing to loan out a greater and greater amount of money with the promise of receiving more money in the future.
- We see that individuals differ in their borrowing / lending activities because they differ in when they receive income, they differ in levels of impatience, and they differ with what assets they have at the present moment (which might offer them different interest rates, e.g. b/c of a greater collateral).

*Assets and Liabilities*

- Your *assets* are anything you own which is of monetary value. Your *liabilities* are the debts you owe to others. Your *net worth* is the difference in your assets and liabilities.
    - The profitability of lenders relies on the *interest rate* of the loan, the *default rate* they recieve on loans that cannot be paid, and the cost that the lenders spend to borrow money. A firm that earns a profit from lending or borrowing money is called a *bank*. It hires employees to provide the service of *maturity transformation*, i.e. allowing individuals to lend money to the bank in the short term (since they may withdraw it at any time), and loaning out that money to individuals in the long term (e.g. via a mortgate, which will be paid back over many years).
    - Money that must be accepted *by law* is called *legal tender.* Normally, legal tender consists of cash, and accounts held by the commercial banks at a *central bank*. A commercial bank can always take out reserves from the central bank because the central bank can just print the money required to take out these reserves, which is why accounts at the central bank are equivalent to currency. This is *not* the case with commercial banks, since commercial banks might not have the total legal tender they loan out.
    - There is also *bank money*, i.e. money which is *created by commercial banks* via loaning more money than they have in assets, i.e. via cheques, or debit / credit cards. The total amount of legal tender and bank money in the economy (excluding that owned by banks) is called *broad money*. Before the financial crisis, legal tender comprised 3-4% of all money in the economy, 6-8% in South Africa, and 8-10% in China.
    - By creating bank money, banks are able to loan in the long term more than they borrow in the short term, which allows them to profit on interest rates. But by doing this, they expose themselves to a *liquidity risk*, i.e. that they will not be able to return all of the money that they have borrowed (especially during a *bank run*, when many individuals withdraw all their funds from a bank), and a *default risk*, i.e. that loans might not be repaid.
- Let us come up with a model of how the *interest rates* at a bank are determined:
    - Commercial banks can borrow as much money they want from a central bank, at an interest rate $i$, called the *base rate*, or *policy rate*. This interest rate will *always* be lower than the interest rate offered to individuals storing money in a bank, since a bank will always choose to loan money from the government because it is not a short term loan. Central banks offer this rate to control how individuals spend money, and so it is crucial to the central bank to understand how the policy rate affects the greater economy.
    - Central banks also offer up *government bonds*. A *bond* is a *financial asset* (a liquid asset that has value because of some contractual power that possession of the bond has) in which an issuer agrees to pay the owner of a bond a given amount over a particular period of time. An example of a bond is a *pension fund*.
    
    After a particular amount of time $T$ after the bond is purchased, the bond *matures,* and no longer pays out funds. At the time of maturity, the issuer agrees to pay out a *face value* $F$. In addition, the issuer agrees to pay out a particular amount of money every period of time, called the *coupon rate* $C$ (originally bonds were pieces of paper, and coupons would be collected by clipping off pieces of the paper).
    
    The value of the bond can be compared to the amount of interest that a bank might offer you to loan out money. The *present value $PV$* of the bond is equal to the price you would pay on the bond such that you would earn a comparable amount of money by investing that money in the bank at a given interest rate $i$. Thus we have
        
        $PV = \frac{C}{1 + i} + \dots + \frac{C}{(1 + i)^T} + \frac{F}{(1 + i)^T}$
        
        No one will buy a bond for more than this value if they trust the bank to pay the promised interest rates. The *yield* $y$ of a bond is the average annual interest on the income received relative to it’s price. Thus if one purchases a bond at the present value, then the yield will be close to the interest rate $i$ offered by banks. Thus bonds allow a central bank to control the interest rate offered by banks.
        
    - Banks determine a *bank lending rate*, the average interest rate offered to individuals looking to store money in the bank in the short term. This is typically much higher than the policy rate. For instance, in 2014, in the UK the policy rate was 0.5%, but the bank lending rate was higher than 3%.
    
    To determine this lending rate, we must determine how banks make a profit.
        - The bank makes money when individuals who are loaned money repay their loans, plus interest. Conversely, banks must pay employees, pay the cost of rental space, and incur costs if individuals default on loans.
        - Banks have *liquid assets* through their reserves, i.e. the cash they can immediately give to debtors who want to retrieve their money. They also have *financial assets*, which they use as collateral in order to justify borrowing money from individuals. And they have *physical assets*, i.e. the buildings they own. And they have the financial assets given by loans to other banks / individuals. These constitute the assets a bank has.
        - The most important liability of a bank is the *bank deposits* made by individuals. Banks may borrow money with collateral given by financial assets (*secured borrowings)*, and without such a collateral (*unsecured borrowings*).
        - Typically liabilities are 97-98% of the total assets of a bank. A bank is a firm very reliant on debt. For financial institutions the *leverage ratio* is the total assets divided by the net worth of the company. Barclay has a leverage ratio of 36. Thus if it lost 3% of it’s assets, it could become *insolvent* when forced to play their debts*,* i.e. it would have more debts than assets.
        

*Risk*

- Lending is Risky: Debtors might not repay their loans. Often people take on debt in order to start a venture which they believe will pay more money, thus paying back the interest on a debt, and earning them profit beyond this debt. Without any risk from taking on a debt, people have no reasons to pay back their debt, which causes a conflict of interest between a debtor and creditor. Thus often banks required individuals to put a portion of their own money into a project (the *equity* of an individual*),* or require the debtor to set aside assets which must be given to the bank in the case of a default (the *collateral* of the debt)
    - A minimum equity ensures that individuals lose something from a failed venture, thus reducing the conflict of interest between a debtor and creditor. The problem with this is that if an individual was already wealthy enough in the first place, they could use their own equity in place. Thus poor people are often not able to put in enough equity to reduce the conflict of interest between debtor and creditor. Thus we see the phenomenon of *credit rationing:* the richer you are, the more credit you have. Poor people are thus *credit constrained*, they are not able to take as much credit as they would like through reasonable means. In Illinois, the typical borrower of ‘payday loans’ is a mid thirties women earning close to minimum wage, at an annual interest rate of 468%. Credit constraints also limit Indian farmers from substantially raising their incomes. Rich people take out loans in ways that make them richer, whereas poor, desperate people often have to take out loans in ways that make them poorer. The fact that creditors often have more bargaining power, as in previous chapters, implies that they are likely to obtain a much greater portion of surplus than debtors.

Question: Did we do the math to determine a bank’s interest rates? Did I miss something?