# Chapter 11: Rent-Seeking, Price-Setting

The *Law of One Price* is often a poor guide of how actual markets function, i.e. identical goods will be traded at the same price in a competitive market. For example, on the 14th January 1997, in the port of Badagara, there was an oversupply of fish — 11 boatloads had to be jettisoned since markets were oversupplied. 15km outside of Badagara, there was excess demand: 15 buyers left unable to purchase any fish. Once mobile phones were introduced to fishermen, these changes were vastly cut, since fishermen were able to tell which market had the highest prices for fish. Thus the way a market is structured can impact how likely the Law of One Price is likely to be followed.

Previously, in Chapter 8, we analyzed how the effects on a market from *exogeneous changes*, i.e. changes outside the model we were considering. This is because we assume in such a model that an equilibrium has been reached, and so the process by which these equilibrium has been reached hasn’t been analyzed. Here we will expand upon this model to make these changes *endogeneous*, i.e. to account for how one obtains equilibrium prices.

When a market has not yet reached equilibrium, both buyers and sellers can act as *price setters*, i.e. transacting at a price not equal to the equilibrium price. If we start from a previous equilibrium, and the supply of hats increase, then a customer might act as a price setter, and try and ask for a bargain on a hat, which would adjust the price. Conversely, a seller of hats might act as a price setter, trying to sell at a lower price in order to ensure that all hats are sold.

Social processes can also affect the prices offered to customers. One fish market might apply an *auction system*, i.e. where many buyers of fish are offered the same price of fish, and whoever is willing to pay the highest price is offered to buy the fish at that price. Another market might have buyers interacting with fishmongers individually — the fishmonger offers a price the buyer might be willing to accept, and the buyer can either accept the price, or walk away and try and find another fishmonger. At other fish markets, there might be more haggling on the initial price offered. Since the individual fishmonger does not have to offer the same price to all individuals, the prices given to each person might fluctuate.

*Loyalty* plays a factor here — buyers loyal to a particular fishmonger might pay higher prices than those which circulate between different fishmongers. Alan Kirman et al conducted a study of a Marseille fish market which showed 90% of loyal customers should expect to pay a higher price than those who circulate. Loyal customers might still remain loyal however, since fishmongers might offer them first picks in exchange for being loyal. On the other hand, in the auction system, there are still loyal buyers who might buy from different ships. But remarkable, loyal customers tend to end up paying *lower* in this scenario, e.g. as analyzed by Gallegeti et al in the Ancona fish market, who reasoned that loyal customers tend to learn better how a particular ship’s auction tends to go, and thus can take advantage of the system better as a result.

In a given industry, the *longer term equilibrium profit of a firm* of any particular good is equivalent. But if variables in a market adjust, e.g. the production function of a good changes, or the demand of a good changes, buyers / sellers can make economic rents by changing the price of economic goods, and thus make an *economic rent*, i.e. so that they make a greater profit than other goods. This gives a *short-run equilibrium* for optimal pricing, i.e. since the easiest variables to change in a model, i.e. the price, change the most quickly. But this economic rent is not expected to last forever, since e.g. other sellers in a market might adjust their prices as well, or more sellers might enter the market. The elasticity of the good impacts the amount of profit that a firm might make economic rent by changing prices in a short-run equilibrium, as we have seen in previous chapters.

Let us use these ideas to build a model analyzing the prices of oil in the 1970s as a reaction to the partial oil embargo led by OPEC, a cartel of countries which produces 40% of the worlds fuel, which happened as a response to the 1973-1974 Arab-Israeli war. The demand for oil in these countries is relatively inelastic as a function of price. As a result of the embargo, which drastically reduced the quantity of oil in the market, the cost of oil per barrel rose from 18$ in 1973, to 56$ in 1974, to $106 in 1980. Despite this, the consumption of oil in the world dropped only 2% from 1972 to 1973, and only 10% from 1973 to 1980.

The elasticity of demand of oil as a function of income in industrializing countries is much higher than more wealthy countries. Thus as these countries become more wealthy, the demand for oil increases. The fact that the supply of oil is inelastic as a function of price is the reason why the price of oil continue to increase from 2000 to 2008. Conversely, the financial crash brought on the opposite effect — incomes decreased, which reduced demand, and thus reduced the price of oil because the supply of oil is inelastic. Oil dropped from 100$ per barrel in 2008, to $40-50 in 2009.

*Assets*

An asset is an item bought not only for its use value, but also its exchange value, i.e. the profit that might be obtained by reselling that item on the market. A financial asset is a monetary contract, and if that contract is tradable, it is called a *security*. The main determinants of a security’s value is the value it is expected to generate, and the uncertainty of that security, and we call this value the *fundamental price*. Many investors strategize the securities they buy by determining whether they believe the fundamental price of a security is lower or higher than the fundamental price, so being able to estimate this price is a very useful skill. Other investors emphasize *momentum,* i.e. buying because they estimate that future prices of the stock will be higher or lower. Predicting the fundamental price or momentum of a good is known as *speculation,* and an analysis of speculation is therefore key to an analysis of the overall behaviour of the securities market.

We have already encountered bonds, which are a security which generate a fixed revenue stream over a particular period of time, as well as a face payment at the time the bond matures. Investors will be willing to invest in bonds if they believe that they cannot get a higher interest rate from other stocks. Government bonds are less risky than corporate bonds, since corporations have a higher chance of defaulting. We thus expect corporate bonds to be offered at a lower price to government bonds.

*Stocks*, or *Shares*, are a financial asset in which there is no promised stream of payments, and the time period in which payments will be made is not fixed, but instead give the owner of the stock the right to a portion of a firm’s profit. Firms which are expected to generate higher profits are expected to sell stocks at a higher price.

How do we evaluate the risk of an asset? First, we must distinguish between *systemic,* or *undiversifiable* *risk*, risk that all assets share by being part of a common market, and *diversifiable*, or *idiosyncratic risk*, risk that some small number of assets might share as a result of the behaviour of the individuals involved in a given security. One of the insights in finance is that diversifiable risk is mostly irrelevant to the valuation of securities, because competitive investors can eliminate this risk by diversifying their portfolio so that risks which cause the profits made from securities as a result of idiosyncratic risk will tend to cancel each other out. On the other hand, systemic risk is more of a problem. Different firms will be impacted by the effects of the overall market as an effect of how closely connected they are to the market.

Investors have a particular *rate of return*, or *market capitalisation rate*, that they need in order to invest in a particular firm. More volatile companies should therefore be expected to have a higher rate of return as a result of investment.

An *Initial Public Offering* of a company is the event where a company sells shares for the first time at a offering price. After that, shares are traded on the *secondary market* for a varying amount of money. Shares here are traded in a mechanism called a *continuous double action*, which allows for continuous, rather than discrete trading of goods. Anyone willing to buy and sell can submit a price and quantity combination called a *limit order* (buying orders are called *bids*, sell orders are called *asks*). If a buy limit order is submitted, and there is a corresponding sell order at a price lower than or equal to that of the buy order, then the trade occurs at the asking price (and the match occurs with the sell order at the lowest asking price). Otherwise, these entries are placed in an *order book,* and can therefore be matched with future buy / sell orders.

Shares are volatile, often changing prices over the course of a single day, deviating and being drawn towards their fundamental value. There is also long term volatily, i.e. a *bubble*, a sustained deviation of a price from it’s fundamental value over a longer period of time. This can occur due to momentum oriented trading, i.e. as the price of a bubble increases, momentum oriented traders might believe the price to continue increasing, and thus buy at that price, which further increases demand, and thus the size of the bubble. At some point this becomes unsustainable, and the price *collapses.*

- The existence of a bubble results from three distinctive features of the stock market. Firstly, goods bought have *resale value*. Thus individuals buy stocks not only because of their use value, but also their exchange value.
- The E*ase of Trading* in the stock market leads to being able to instantly switch between being a buyer and a seller of a particular good.
- The *Ease of Borrowing* allows individuals to gain more money than they would otherwise spend by borrowing from future earnings.

This kind of bubble does not tend to occur in, for instance, the bread market, since bread does not tend to have resale value, and ease of trading does not occur. On the other hand, housing markets, and even tulip markets give rise to similar phenomena than the securities market.

Some economists, like Eugene Famas and Robert Lucas do not believe in bubbles, believing they are only seen as occuring as a result of hindsight. They believe in the *efficient market hypothesis*, i.e. that fundamental values are incorporated into the price of an asset virtually instantaneously. If individuals were able to predict a crash a week before it occurs, then that information would be possible to attain by many individuals, so the crash would occur instantly when that information is possible to predict. Others, like Bob Lucas, point out that such individuals might not be motivated to ‘pop the bubble’. After all, other misinformed investors might cause the cost to rise even more, so they can take greater economic rents by waiting *just a little bit longer* before cashing out. Empirical research suggests that investors might wait on ‘popping the bubble’, instead ‘riding the bubble’, which causes a huge crash in the future once these investors begin to percieve that other investors have caught on to the bubble, and that a crash must soon be inevitable. Thus exogeneous influence might be useful to encourage investors to take advantage of a bubble immediately, thus reducing the overall crash that will eventually occur. Schiller argues that selling assets before this crash might lead to losses in the short term, but overall gains in the long term, so that ‘riding the bubble’ isn’t the best strategy overall, and has released a product called an *exchange traded note*, whose value is associated with the values associated with bubbles (TODO: look into this more).

If investors anticipate a future crash, they may *short a stock*. This involves borrowing a stock from a seller with a promise to give back the stock by a particular time in the future. If you can time when the stock will drop in price, then you can make lots of money from shorting. But if prices continue to rise, then you will lose out on a loss of money, losing money due to the increased price, and due to the interest on the price of the stock you borrowed. Thus shorting can be incredibly risky.

There are other markets with a primary & secondary structure. For instance, tickets for concerts and other events are often sold at a fixed price. But supply often vastly outstrips demand. The tickets are then sold on the secondary market, in which tickets are sold at a much higher price than the initial price (*scalping)*. Event organizers often act to discourage scalping. For instance, a lottery ticket might be used for *rationing* tickets to particular parties, rather than giving out tickets via a price allocation scheme. David Chang’s restaurant “Momofuku” in New York sells out lunch tickets 3 seconds after they are offered, one week in advance, at 10AM, for $175 each. He also offered up a reservation at a charity auction, which went for $2870, thus indicating that individuals are OK with price allocation if the profits go to charity rather than the seller of a product.

Rent prices might also be capped at a certain maximum price, to avoid lower income families from being priced out of certain areas. A secondary subletting market,  if legal, might form to compensate for an increase in immediate demand. This leads to a short term equlibrium, which might eventually be compensated for by an increase in housing being built, resulting in a new equilibrium with a price below the fixed price.

Question: Wisdom of the Crowds seems to be a poor metaphor here since in that scenario there is a *correct* answer for a particular situation.

Question: Blue Eyed Islander Paradox

*Friedrich Hayek (1899-1992)*

Austrian, and later British, economist, who believed governments should play a minimal role in the organization of society. In his book *The Road to Serfdom,* he argued that any well intentioned planning would inevitably lead to totalitarianism. His key contribution to economics was the idea that prices are *messages* which allow a competitive equilibrium to be reached. Nonetheless, he disagreed with that part of theory that assumes an economic equilibrium had been reached (i.e. as Walras an other economists of his time had done), arguing instead that we should find a better theory of the competitive process that accounts for how this equilibrium is reached as a result of a process, e.g. via advertising, differentiating products, undercutting prices, and so on.