# Chapter 5: Property and Power

In this chapter, we explore the relationship between institutions, and how they influence *bargaining power*, the ability of an individual to obtain a given amount of profit made in an industry. Normally, the power of deciding the amount of profit given to employees is decided by the employer in the labor market, since employees set the terms of employment, and have the ability to exclude a worker by firing them. The labor market thus functions analogously to the ultimatum game studied in the previous chapter.

An *allocation* is an outcome of an economic transaction. It is of interest to determine theories of *how* things are allocated, as well as to evaluated *which methods* are most preferable / just in society. The first involves facts, the second, values. Economics cannot solve the problems about which allocations are just, but it can identify the connections between different preferences and the trade-offs seen by enforcing certain principles.

- An allocation is *Pareto efficient* if there is no other technically feasible alternative in which every single party involved in a transaction would be better off. But if an allocation is Pareto efficient, that does not mean that it is preferable to other alternatives: there are many allocations which are Pareto efficient, but that which we might see as unfair, e.g. an outcome of the ultimatum game between self interested individuals in which Player 1 takes home $99.99 and Player 2 takes home $0.01.
- We consider two different types of justice: *substantial judgements*, or judgements related to the allocation of a transaction, and *procedural judgements*, judgements related to the institutions that brought about a particular allocation.
    - Factors that may be relevant to a substantial judgement are the allocations themselves, the *happiness / wellbeing* as a result of a transaction, or the *freedom* of individuals as a result.
    - Factors that may be relevant to a procedural judgement are whether an allocation was an i*nformed voluntary exchange of private property*, e.g. without force or fraud, there was equal opportunity for all individuals in a society to be involved in the particular allocation, or whether the individuals *deserved* to receive what was allocated, i.e. whether they upheld social norms such as working hard.
- Let us consider a model of grain production under three different systems of instutitions:
    - In the first system, a farmer works by themselves to produce grain to feed themselves. We have already seen models that describe how this system works: a farmer will choose to work a certain length of time in a field so that the marginal rate of substitution of time to farming output is equal to the marginal rate of transformation of time into farming output.
    - Now suppose that an overseer is able to force a farmer to work for them. The overseer does not care about the farmer’s preference for time, so the overseer will force the farmer to work as much as is *biologically feasible* (i.e. feasible to the limits of the human body). The overseer then gets to choose how much grain they keep, and how much they give to the farmer. Again this distribution is limited to a particular biologically feasible set: the farmer must be fed so that they can continue working for the overseer. The amount of food a farmer needs might depend on the amount the farmer is forced to work. So the overseer calculates the number of hours for the farmer to work that produces the greatest amount of grain relative to the amount of grain the farmer must consume to survive.
    - Now we introduce the more complicated scenario. An overseer can no longer enslave the farmer. But the overseer owns a farm, and can exclude the farmer from working on that farm if they choose so. How much of the *surplus* grain production the overseer must distribute to the farmer now depends on the *bargaining power* of the farmer.
        - If the farmer did not have the option to live at subsistence level, then the farmer would be forced to work to survive. This would mean the farmer would be *forced* to accept the overseer’s offer for employment, which means the overseer could offer the same distribution of grain as in the slavery scenario.
        - But now suppose the farmer can choose not to work for the overseer, i.e. the farmer has the option of relying on subsistence levels of income, e.g. provided by the government or through savings. Thus the farmer now has the option to accept or reject an offer from the overseer. To figure out the optimal offer the overseer can give (assuming only self interest), the overseer draws the *reservation indifference curve,* i.e. the curve consisting of feasible choices of work hours and wages that are equivalent in preference to the farmer to the utility obtained from choosing not to work (the *reserve option* of the farmer). This gives a region of *economic feasibility*. The overseer then chooses the point in the feasible region to maximize the amount of output they receive. Given pure self interest, the choice of the overseer will be on this line of reservation indifference, or at least offering a tiny amount of grain more than this deal.
        - Now suppose that the farmer, and fellow farm workers, lobby for a new law in which working hours are limited to four hours per day, and the total pay must be at least 4.5 bushels of wheat. By limiting the economically feasible region, the farmer then receives a greater amount of the surplus, in particular, the farmer can move off the reservation indifference curve. However, the outcome is not Pareto efficient; by removing the law, there are options in which both the farmer and the overseer gain more utility - it’s just that, without other motivation, the overseer will never offer those options to the farmer.
        - Now suppose that we, in addition, add a clause that means overseers cannot *force* farmers to work more than four hours, but working more than four hours is legal. Thus farmers must always be offered the choice to either work four hours. That is one of their reserve options. The reserve indifference curve is now increased since there are now more options to consider. This then results in Pareto efficient option. The new laws certainly do not benefit the overseer though, the overseer was doing much better in the slavery / no reserve option path.
    - The moral of this story is that markets give individuals the power to produce mutual gains through exchange they would not be able to through individual work. This mutual gain is called the *surplus*. However, how we allocate that surplus is subject to the various institutions at play in a given society. Technology might prevent a particular deal from being feasible at a given time. Other institutions provide reservation options that give bargaining power over someone’s ability to accept or reject a portion of the surplus. Certain institutions might move a given Pareto efficient decision away from being Pareto efficient. Ownership of certain items may also influence the distribution of the surplus.
        - This isn’t a far fetched situation. In Bengal, it had been the normal since the 18th century for many farmers to work as share croppers or bargadars, renting land from farm owners, and giving half of the produced crop to the farm owner. But in 1978, the Left Front of West Bengal was elected, and put into new laws, called *Operation barga,* which stated that farmers were allowed to keep three quarters of their crop, and only had to pay 25% of their crops to avoid eviction. This was advocated by arguments that bargadars had a greater incentive to work hard and maintain the land. West Bengal saw a dramatic increase in production after this change - one study suggested the operation was responsible for a 28% increase in agricultural productivity. The empowerment of the bargadars meant local governments became more responsive to the bargadars.
    - The *Lorenz* curve is a measure of inequality in a society, invented by economist Max Lorenz in 1905. The curve is defined by a function f: [0,1] → [0,1], which gives, for a given quantity t, the percentage of total income in a society possessed by the poorest t percent of the population. In a perfectly equal society, for instance, we have f(t) = t for all t. Any Lorenz curve always lies below this line, and so the deviation from this line tells us a measure of inequality in the society.
        - The *Gini coefficient g,* named after statistician Corrado Gini (1884-1965) gives *half the relative mean difference* in income between a population. Thus if X(1),…,X(N) are the incomes of a population, then g = (1/2) E(|X(i) - X(j)|) / E(X(i)). If income is evenly distributed in a society, then g = 0. If one person has all wealth, then g = 1. For large populations, the Gini coefficient is closely approximated by the area between the line f(t) = t and the Lorenz curve.
    - Taxation may reduce income inequality. Thus, to measure inequality, it is often more useful to use the *disposable income* of a society to define Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients, rather than *market income*.