# Chapter 12: Markets, Efficiency, and Public Policy

Certain logical arguments show that individuals pursuing their private interest in a perfectly competitive free market implement Pareto efficient outcomes. The happy coincidence between private interests and public good is an attribute of a model, but almost never a property of how markets work in practice, and therefore not a good guide to how to implement economic public policy. Often markets in practice result in *Pareto-inefficient outcomes;* in this case, we say a *********************market failure********************* occurs.

Here are some examples of how the model can fail in practice:

- Using pesticides on some farms has lead to contamination of nearby water supplies, leading to significantly higher rates of prostate cancer and neurological damage among nearby villagers. The damage that is caused to nearby villagers does not show up in the profit / loss model of the market observed by farmers, and so the market does not take into account the cost given by the use of pesticides.
- Not following procedure when administering antibiotics / overusing antibiotics leads to antibiotics growing resistance to infection. Doctors recognize that leaving the application of antibiotics to the free market leads precisely to these problems: people might use antibiotics when other treatments are better, or stop using antibiotics to save money when they feel better, which produces antibiotic resistant pathogens.

Here are several explanations as to why the model can fail to account for social good:

- We observe that *************individuals are not taking account the cost their decisions have on others*************. We will see that to solve these problems in an economic manner, governments should either *******regulate******* actions that result in costs to others, or institute measures that ********transfer******** the costs of certain actions on others to the individuals themselves.
- In order for a market to work well, one must have a clear distinction of private property, as dictated by property rights or social norms. In the examples above, it is difficult to guarantee property rights to certain phenomena that matter economically (e.g. owning the right to have clean rivers or the right for ability for bacteria to resist antibiotics). In some situations, making negative externalities the private responsibility of individuals can fix a market failure, i.e. by making trash the private property of those who produce that trash. But it is more difficult to say that factories ‘own’ the smoke fumes they produce, which do not need to be dealt with in the same way. Economists say we have **********incomplete contracts********** in this situation, or a **************missing market**************.
- Certain types of goods may not be distributed in a way conductive to a competitive market. For instance, ***************non-rival goods***************, whose marginal cost of production sharply drops off, or ********non-excludable goods********, goods which, once exchanged in a transaction, can be used by others not directly involved in a transaction (this is connected to the incomplete contract situation of the previous bullet point).

****************External Effects****************

To model market failures, we introduce the concept of an ***************external effect*************** to our economic models. By this, we mean a positive or negative effect of production and consumption of goods, that is not specified in the benefits or costs of those directly involved in a particular transaction.

One way we might be able to estimate external effects is via a ***********social cost*********** we associate with a particular economic transaction, which is the sum of the *************private costs************* of producing a particular resource involved in a transaction, as well as the *************external cost************* others not involved in a transaction must pay. If the external costs of a transaction are significant, it is unlikely that a competitive market will be able to obtain a Pareto efficient outcome purely through transactions, since these transactions will operate to optimize *************private costs*************.

Indeed, if a competitive market has reached an equilibrium point at which the marginal private cost of production is significantly lower than the marginal social cost of production, then external individuals, by paying the producers a fee proportional to the marginal private cost of production, so as to negotiate a decreased amount of production with the benefit that the social costs of production are decreased at a much higher rate. Thus something external to the competitive market, in this case **********bargaining********** between individuals lead to a more efficient alternative for everyone involved.

Of course, implicit to this model is that individuals are able to *******quantify******* social costs. If one is unable to quantify these costs, both regulation and bargaining may fail.

****************Coasean Bargains****************

The situation described above, in which external individuals and producers of a resource negotiate privately to ensure a Pareto optimal situation, is called a ***************Coasean bargain,*************** as theorized by economist Ronald Coase. Coase argued that individuals often have more information than a government as to how to implement these situations, and thus negotiate a better solution than a solution legally instituted by a government. Nonetheless, this model could not always be put into practice because bargaining takes time, energy, and money, and thus has it’s own cost, which we might call *****************transaction costs*****************. Also, hidden information (the actual social cost of an action) can prevent this situation happening as well. Moreover, one needs to be organized enough to have communication between parties (so that bargaining can take place in the first place), and so if social costs effects a significant number of individuals, or effects individuals who are unable to efficiently communicate between one another, then a Coasean bargain may prove impractical.

Even if legal consequences are imposed, an additional Coasean bargain may provide a more efficient alternative to the legal decision. For instance, Coase analyzed a confectioner, whose noisy machinery was disrupting the operation of a consulting office next door. A legal case, ****************Sturges vs. Bridgman**************** insued, in which the court was able to prevent the confectioner from using their machinery. In his essay, *“The Problem of Social Costs”*, Coase argued that regardless of whether the court allowed or prevented the use of the confection machinery, a better economic outcome could be determined by an economic transaction, i.e. the consulting office paying the confectioner to hold off on production at certain times of the day, or the confectioner paying the consulting office in order for the right to use machinery at certain times of the day.

Question: The effects of a Coasean bargain lead to a more Pareto efficient outcome, but the legal decisions affect bargaining power, so that the Pareto optimal decision reached may benefit one side rather than the other, e.g. in the Confectioner example.

On the other hand, certain decision ***are*** more efficient when done in a centralized manner than via a decentralized market. We do not need to use government examples here: the free market has lead to the existence of large corporations who are able to produce goods in a centralized manner much more efficiently than decentralized, small scale production would be able to do. Thus the price of centralized decision making cannot be the sole reason why someone would reject institutional decision making vs. decision making on the free market.

**********Regulation**********

Suppose that a Coasean bargain is impractical. A government can use the following methods to reduce output to take into account external costs of production:

- Regulating the amount of a good produced will reduce the social costs involved in transactions. But it also means that the supply of goods will be reduced, leading to a decrease in the total amount of private surplus.
- Taxation: A Tax on the good sends a price message to the market, to take into account the social cost of producing a good. This kind of tax is called a *************Pigouvian Tax,************* after the economist Arthur Pigou who advocated it. As with regulation, social costs are reduced, but the total amount of private surplus will be reduced to a greater extent than regulation, since the government receives some of this surplus rather than private individuals.
- Enforcing Compensation: This has the same effects of taxation, except the individuals affected by a good gain more benefit because they, rather than the government, receive the benefits of the social cost of a good. Thus there will be a larger reduction in social cost vs. regulation and taxation, but with the same reduction in private surplus that was seen with taxation.

Government regulation can also prove to be a problem however, since it is often much more difficult to measure social costs than private costs, and government might be motivated to favor more powerful groups than less powerful groups, which could lead to an unfair allocation of resources.

************Arthur Pigou (1877-1959)************

A Protege of Alfred Marshall, whose economic theories focused on using economics for the good of society. He is often seen as the founder of *****************welfare economics*****************. Pigou believed that the reallocation of resources was necessary when the interests of private individuals differed from the interests of greater society, causing *************externalities*************.

************Public Goods************

We have previously encountered the social dilemma of a public good, that individuals may choose to contribute to, and produce benefits for all involved. No individual can solely provide a public good for themselves, so teamwork is essential to ensure the right to a public good.

The defining aspect of a public good is that, if it is available to one individual, it is available to all others at next to no extra cost. Such goods are also called ***************non rival goods***************. Examples include water systems, or knowledge (once one individual knows something, sharing that knowledge requires next to no extra work). An additional property that economists also attribute to public goods is that they are ********************non-excludable goods:******************** an individual cannot choose whether others also use a particular good once it is available. Public goods that can be excluded are called *****artificially scarce goods*****, or **********club goods********** (because they function like joining a private club). A rival good that is non-excludable is called a *********************common-pool resource*********************.

Competitive markets are typically good at allocating private goods. But they can fail to produce Pareto optimal outcomes when allocating non-rival goods, since the marginal cost of production is zero. They can also fail to produce Pareto optimal goods which are non-excludable, since they cannot really be distributed via private transactions. In these cases, public policy might be necessary to either distribute these goods, or motivate markets to distribute these goods in a Pareto optimal manner.

******Moral Hazard, Adverse Selection, and Lemons******

An interaction in economics has the phenomenon of ************moral hazard************ if one party cannot specify in a contract an action that another individual can perform, which effects the well-being of that party. This is normally because of ******************hidden information******************. The first example under which moral hazard occurred was in the insurance industry, where insured people are less motivated to prevent consequences under which insurance protects them from harm.

Moral hazard can often result in a situation of *****************adverse selection*****************. For instance, the price incurred on insurance companies by those who are reckless when they have insurance means that the company must raise the price of all who are insured, since insurance companies cannot detect which individuals are reckless. Insurance will therefore look like a bad deal for those who are *not* reckless. A situation results in which only the reckless will continue to have insurance. Similarly, adverse selection might result in the health insurance industry, in which individuals who pay for health insurance tend to be more sickly, whereas healthy individuals are priced out, if health insurance is unable to measure the health of individuals they insure.

A classic example of adverse selection is in the analysis of the used car market, initially analyzed by economist George Akerlof. Consider the following economic model: Each day, 10 owners of used cars consider selling their car. Each car differs in quality, but only the owners of the car know the quality of their car. Suppose that there are a vast supply of prospective buyers of used cars, such that anyone will be willing to purchase a car at a rate proportional to the quality of that car. The problem is that buyers cannot measure the quality of cars until they buy them. But let’s suppose that buyers are able to see the true quality of cars sold before. Given this information, they might be motivated to pay the *average* price of cars sold the day before. But this means that each day, only sellers whose car quality is lower than the average price of cars sold the day before will be willing to sell cars. Other individuals who have higher quality cars will be priced out of the market. The result is that the quality of cars sold each day will continue to decrease and decrease. The result is that only ******lemons****** will remain in the market. Adverse selection has resulted in a market where only poor quality cars are sold: we thus see a ***************missing market*************** has emerged: high quality cars cannot be sold.

Adverse selection can also lead to a missing market in credit: without significant collateral, individuals might not be able to take out loans even if they want to use this loan in a highly productive way, simply because credit companies cannot effectively measure the risk of a given loan. Thus poor borrowers are ***************credit excluded***************. 

On the other hand, banks might be willing to give out risky loans, which have the potential to give them a large payout, even at the risk of bankruptcy, since the bank might be insured by the government because it is ‘too big to fail’, i.e. because the cost of keeping the bank afloat on the economy might be lower than the cost of the entire bank failing. Thus their is moral hazard in the decision for a bank to be too big to fail.

*************************************Moral Reasons for Limiting Markets*************************************

On the other hand, there are also moral reasons why individuals believe some things should not be allocated on the free market. For instance, it is considered immoral to sell some things on the market, like human beings, vital organs, or to sell service in wars, so these markets are called *********repugnant*********. Other situations, like selling a place in a queue, might be considering repugnant. On the other hand, some people believe that some goods or services should be available to all, independent of their ability to pay the market price for these goods. These are ***********merit goods***********.

Some argue that if trade is voluntary, and the trade does not induce a social cost, then it should be allowed, since all those involved in the trade will obtain mutual gains. But there are significant arguments that some transactions should not be performed on a market:

- Certain situations might force individuals into a trade they might later regret, for instance, selling their child to pay for food for the rest of the month.
- The sale of certain items is below human dignity and values, e.g. it is immoral to sell human children purely because of the act itself. Similarily, it might be considered below human dignity not to try and provide certain things to all humans, e.g. not trying to provide healthcare, education, or safe drinking water to individuals might be considered a violation of a human right.
- By increasingly marketing all things in our society, we sharpen the sting of **********inequality**********, since inequality means less people will be able to lead what the society they live in considers ‘a good life’. Democracy does not require perfect equality, but what it does require is that citizens share a common life, encounter one another, and bump up with one another, which leads us to care for the ***********common good***********.
- Putting certain things on the market replaces the ‘inherent good’ of a certain act, with the ‘monetary good’ of that act, i.e. so individuals will pursue certain actions purely because the market encourages them to do so. Related to this, many economists assume that markets are *****inert*****, they do not change the value or meaning of the goods where they are exchanged.

To summarize, the values of the market do not directly align with the ways that we value humanity, and by marketizing more and more aspects of human life, we might corrode human values we wish to preserve.